Add gRPC specification (#583)
ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc: docs/spec/spec.md

         * 5.1.2.5. [Client - Basic Auth](#5125-client---basic-auth)
         * 5.1.2.6. [Client - Bearer Token Auth](#5126-client---bearer-token-auth)
         * 5.1.2.7. [Client - Self Signed JWT Auth](#5127-client---self-signed-jwt-auth)
         * 5.1.2.8. [Client - OAuth2](#5128-client---oauth2)
6. [gRPC Utility Functions](#6-grpc-utility-functions)
   * 6.1. [gRPC Deadline](#61-grpc-deadline)
   * 6.2. [gRPC Compression](#62-grpc-compression)
   * 6.3. [gRPC Access and Trace Logs](#63-grpc-access-and-trace-logs)
   * 6.4. [gRPC Retry](#64-grpc-retry)

# 1. Overview
Ballerina gRPC standard library has five primary aspects in handling values.
1. gRPC CLI (command line interface)
2. Protocol buffers to Ballerina data mapping
3. gRPC communication
4. gRPC Security
5. gRPC utility functions

# 2. gRPC Command Line Interface (CLI)

Ballerina language has a command-line interface that manages the lifecycle of a Ballerina program (such as build, test, and run). In addition, Ballerina CLI contains all the gRPC related stub and service skeleton generation capabilities. The gRPC command in Ballerina CLI is as follows.

```sh

> bal grpc --input <proto-file-path> --output <output-directory> --mode client|service

Reviewer: AFAIR, we also support additional flags to set dependent proto paths. @MadhukaHarith92 can you point the fix

Reviewer: https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues/1612

Author: Added in here https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/3a14d279470bf270274bfbe4cffa1b18de3407cb

#
# + message - The record or the scalar value to be packed as Any type
# + return - Any value representation of the given message
public isolated function pack(ValueType message) returns Any;

# Unpack and return the specified Ballerina value
#
# + anyValue - Any value to be unpacked
# + targetTypeOfAny - Type descriptor of the return value
# + return - Return a value of the given type
public isolated function unpack(Any anyValue, ValueTypeDesc targetTypeOfAny = <>) returns targetTypeOfAny|Error;
```

# 4. gRPC Communication

gRPC has 4 types of RPCs (Remote Procedure Calls), and Ballerina supports all of them.
1. Unary
2. Server streaming
3. Client streaming
4. Bidirectional streaming

Note that, to explain the behaviour of these 4 RPC types, this document uses the standard Route Guide example.
- [Details of the route guide example](https://grpc.io/docs/languages/go/basics/)
- [Protocol buffer definition of the route guide example](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/blob/674bda12a90f99c2735badc5567cd7dd7e14ba09/examples/routeguide/proto-file/route_guide.proto)

> ## 4.1. Unary RPC

Reviewer: Shall we use `Simple RPC` instead of `Unary RPC`. On the official site, it refers to `Simple RPC`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/ecbfe1acbc43fc9a96e1ed8b9967f3d4e554556f

```ballerina
public function main() returns error? {
    RouteGuideClient ep = check new ("http://localhost:8980");
    Point[] points = [
        {latitude: 406109563, longitude: -742186778}, 
        {latitude: 411733222, longitude: -744228360}, 
        {latitude: 744228334, longitude: -742186778}
    ];
    RecordRouteStreamingClient recordRouteStrmClient = check ep->RecordRoute();
    foreach Point p in points {
        check recordRouteStrmClient->sendPoint(p);
    }
    check recordRouteStrmClient->complete();
    RouteSummary? routeSummary = check recordRouteStrmClient->receiveRouteSummary();
    if routeSummary is RouteSummary {
        io:println(`Finished trip with ${routeSummary.point_count} points. Passed ${routeSummary.feature_count} features. "Travelled ${routeSummary.distance} meters. It took ${routeSummary.elapsed_time} seconds.`);
    }
}
```

## 4.4. Bidirectional Streaming RPC
The RPC service definition of a bidirectional streaming call is as follows.
```proto
service RouteGuide {

>     rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {}

Reviewer: Seems like the Bidirectional streaming method is incorrect. please check

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/ecbfe1acbc43fc9a96e1ed8b9967f3d4e554556f

>     rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    rpc RouteChat(stream RouteNote) returns (stream RouteNote) {}
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/ecbfe1acbc43fc9a96e1ed8b9967f3d4e554556f

         * 5.1.1.6. [Client - Bearer Token Auth](#5116-client---bearer-token-auth)
         * 5.1.1.7. [Client - Self Signed JWT Auth](#5117-client---self-signed-jwt-auth)
         * 5.1.1.8. [Client - OAuth2](#5118-client---oauth2)
      * 5.1.2 [Imperative Approach](#512-imperative-approach)
         * 5.1.2.1. [Service - File User Store](#5121-service---file-user-store)
         * 5.1.2.2. [Service - LDAP User Store](#5122-service---ldap-user-store)
         * 5.1.2.3. [Service - JWT](#5123-service---jwt)
         * 5.1.2.4. [Service - OAuth2](#5124-service---oauth2)
         * 5.1.2.5. [Client - Basic Auth](#5125-client---basic-auth)
         * 5.1.2.6. [Client - Bearer Token Auth](#5126-client---bearer-token-auth)
         * 5.1.2.7. [Client - Self Signed JWT Auth](#5127-client---self-signed-jwt-auth)
         * 5.1.2.8. [Client - OAuth2](#5128-client---oauth2)
6. [gRPC Utility Functions](#6-grpc-utility-functions)
   * 6.1. [gRPC Deadline](#61-grpc-deadline)
   * 6.2. [gRPC Compression](#62-grpc-compression)
   * 6.3. [gRPC Access and Trace Logs](#63-grpc-access-and-trace-logs)
   * 6.4. [gRPC Retry](#64-grpc-retry)

# 1. Overview

> Ballerina gRPC standard library has five primary aspects in handling time values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ballerina gRPC standard library has five primary aspects in handling  values.
```

Author: Fixed in here https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/543b1f0d2b2f7e6fafb4a9b3f987737cda8cc437

# 3. Protocol Buffers to Ballerina Data Mapping

The following table illustrates the data mapping of protocol buffers data types to relevant Ballerina types.

|Protobuf Type|Ballerina Type|
|---|---|
|google.protobuf.DoubleValue|float|
|google.protobuf.FloatValue|float|
|google.protobuf.Int64Value|int|
|google.protobuf.UInt64Value|int|
|google.protobuf.Int32Value|int|
|google.protobuf.UInt32Value|int|
|google.protobuf.BoolValue|boolean|
|google.protobuf.StringValue|string|
|google.protobuf.BytesValue|byte[]|
|google.protobuf.Empty|()|
|google.protobuf.Timestamp|time:Utc|
|google.protobuf.Duration|time:Seconds|

> |google.protobuf.Any|'any:Any|

Reviewer 2: Need to add `struct`

Author: Fixed in here https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/543b1f0d2b2f7e6fafb4a9b3f987737cda8cc437

# + return - Any value representation of the given message
public isolated function pack(ValueType message) returns Any;

# Unpack and return the specified Ballerina value
#
# + anyValue - Any value to be unpacked
# + targetTypeOfAny - Type descriptor of the return value
# + return - Return a value of the given type
public isolated function unpack(Any anyValue, ValueTypeDesc targetTypeOfAny = <>) returns targetTypeOfAny|Error;
```

# 4. gRPC Communication

gRPC has 4 types of RPCs (Remote Procedure Calls), and Ballerina supports all of them.
1. Unary
2. Server streaming
3. Client streaming
4. Bidirectional streaming

Note that, to explain the behaviour of these 4 RPC types, this document uses the standard Route Guide example.
- [Details of the route guide example](https://grpc.io/docs/languages/go/basics/)
- [Protocol buffer definition of the route guide example](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/blob/674bda12a90f99c2735badc5567cd7dd7e14ba09/examples/routeguide/proto-file/route_guide.proto)

## 4.1. Unary RPC

The RPC service definition of a unary call is as follows.
```proto
service RouteGuide {

>     rpc GetFeature(Point) returns (Feature) {}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rpc GetFeature(Point) returns (Feature) {};
```

Author: Semicolon is not needed https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/v1.38.0/examples/route_guide/routeguide/route_guide.proto

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function GetFeature(Point point) returns Feature|error {
        foreach Feature feature in FEATURES {
            if feature.location == point {
                return feature;
            }
        }
        return {location: point, name: ""};
    }
}
```

Here, the RPC implementation creates a featured record and directly return it from the remote method.

**RPC Using a Caller**

The Ballerina implementation of the same unary RPC using a caller is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function GetFeature(RouteGuideFeatureCaller caller, Point point) returns error? {
        Feature?|error feature = featureFromPoint(point);
        if feature is Feature {
            check caller->sendFeature(feature);
        } else if feature is error {
            check caller->sendError(<grpc:Error> feature);
        } else {
            check caller->sendFeature({location: {latitude: 0, longitude: 0}, name: ""});
        }
    }
}
```

## 4.2. Server Streaming RPC
The RPC service definition of a server streaming call is as follows.
```proto
service RouteGuide {

>     rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {};
```

Author: Semicolon is not needed https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/v1.38.0/examples/route_guide/routeguide/route_guide.proto

}
```

**RPC Using Direct Return**

The Ballerina implementation of the server streaming RPC using a direct return is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function ListFeatures(Rectangle rectangle) returns stream<Feature, grpc:Error?>|error {

        Feature[] selectedFeatures = [];
        foreach Feature feature in FEATURES {
            if inRange(feature.location, rectangle) {
                selectedFeatures.push(feature);
            }
        }
        return selectedFeatures.toStream();
    }
}
```

**RPC Using a Caller**

The Ballerina implementation of the server streaming RPC using a caller return is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function ListFeatures(RouteGuideFeatureCaller caller, Rectangle rectangle) returns error? {

        foreach Feature feature in FEATURES {
            if inRange(feature.location, rectangle) {
                check caller->sendFeature(feature);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## 4.3. Client Streaming RPC
The RPC service definition of a client streaming call is as follows.
```proto
service RouteGuide {

>     rpc RecordRoute(stream Point) returns (RouteSummary) {}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rpc RecordRoute(stream Point) returns (RouteSummary) {};
```

Author: The semicolon is not needed https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/v1.38.0/examples/route_guide/routeguide/route_guide.proto

The Ballerina implementation of the client streaming RPC using a caller return is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function RecordRoute(RouteGuideRouteSummaryCaller caller, stream<Point, grpc:Error?> clientStream) returns error? {
        Point? lastPoint = ();
        int pointCount = 0;
        int featureCount = 0;
        int distance = 0;

        decimal startTime = time:monotonicNow();
        check clientStream.forEach(function(Point p) {
            pointCount += 1;
            if pointExistsInFeatures(FEATURES, p) {
                featureCount += 1;
            }

            if lastPoint is Point {
                distance = calculateDistance(<Point>lastPoint, p);
            }
            lastPoint = p;
        });
        decimal endTime = time:monotonicNow();
        int elapsedTime = <int>(endTime - startTime);
        return caller->sendRouteSummary({point_count: pointCount, feature_count: featureCount, distance: distance, elapsed_time: elapsedTime});
    }
}
```

## 4.4. Bidirectional Streaming RPC
The RPC service definition of a bidirectional streaming call is as follows.
```proto
service RouteGuide {

>     rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rpc ListFeatures(Rectangle) returns (stream Feature) {};
```

Author: The semicolon is not needed https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/v1.38.0/examples/route_guide/routeguide/route_guide.proto

**RPC Using a Caller**

The Ballerina implementation of the bidirectional streaming RPC using a caller return is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function RouteChat(RouteGuideRouteNoteCaller caller, stream<RouteNote, grpc:Error?> clientNotesStream) returns error? {
        check clientNotesStream.forEach(function(RouteNote note) {
            future<error?> f1 = start sendRouteNotesFromLocation(caller, note.location);
            lock {
                ROUTE_NOTES.push(note);
            }
            error? waitErr = wait f1;
        });
    }
}
```

# 5. gRPC Security

## 5.1 Authentication and Authorization

There are two ways to enable authentication and authorization in gRPC.
1. Declarative approach
2. Imperative approach

### 5.1.1 Declarative Approach

This is also known as the configuration-driven approach, which is used for simple use cases, where users have to provide a set of configurations and do not need to be worried more about how authentication and authorization works. The user does not have full control over the configuration-driven approach.

> The service and/or resource configurations are used to define the authentication and authorization configurations. Users can configure the configurations needed for different authentication schemes and configurations needed for authorizations of each authentication scheme. Also, the configurations can be provided at both the service and resource levels. The priority will be given from bottom to top. Then, the auth handler creation and request authentication/authorization is handled internally without user intervention. The requests that succeeded both authentication and/or authorization phases according to the configurations will be passed to the business logic layer.

Reviewer 2: gRPC doesnt provide resource level configuration since there are no resource methods right?

Author: Fixed in here https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/b02c203ed54cffed7a481d25723eca7a422f1717

      * 5.1.2 [Imperative Approach](#512-imperative-approach)
         * 5.1.2.1. [Service - File User Store](#5121-service---file-user-store)
         * 5.1.2.2. [Service - LDAP User Store](#5122-service---ldap-user-store)
         * 5.1.2.3. [Service - JWT](#5123-service---jwt)
         * 5.1.2.4. [Service - OAuth2](#5124-service---oauth2)
         * 5.1.2.5. [Client - Basic Auth](#5125-client---basic-auth)
         * 5.1.2.6. [Client - Bearer Token Auth](#5126-client---bearer-token-auth)
         * 5.1.2.7. [Client - Self Signed JWT Auth](#5127-client---self-signed-jwt-auth)
         * 5.1.2.8. [Client - OAuth2](#5128-client---oauth2)
6. [gRPC Utility Functions](#6-grpc-utility-functions)
   * 6.1. [gRPC Deadline](#61-grpc-deadline)
   * 6.2. [gRPC Compression](#62-grpc-compression)
   * 6.3. [gRPC Access and Trace Logs](#63-grpc-access-and-trace-logs)
   * 6.4. [gRPC Retry](#64-grpc-retry)

# 1. Overview
Ballerina gRPC standard library has five primary aspects in handling values.
1. gRPC CLI (command line interface)
2. Protocol buffers to Ballerina data mapping
3. gRPC communication
4. gRPC Security
5. gRPC utility functions

# 2. gRPC Command Line Interface (CLI)

> Ballerina language comes up with a command-line interface that manages the lifecycle of a Ballerina program (such as build, test, and run). In addition, Ballerina CLI contains all the gRPC related stub and service skeleton generation capabilities. The gRPC command in Ballerina CLI is as follows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ballerina language has a command-line interface that manages the lifecycle of a Ballerina program (such as build, test, and run). In addition, Ballerina CLI contains all the gRPC related stub and service skeleton generation capabilities. The gRPC command in Ballerina CLI is as follows.
```

**RPC Using a Caller**

The Ballerina implementation of the bidirectional streaming RPC using a caller return is as follows.

```ballerina
service "RouteGuide" on new grpc:Listener(8980) {

    remote function RouteChat(RouteGuideRouteNoteCaller caller, stream<RouteNote, grpc:Error?> clientNotesStream) returns error? {
        check clientNotesStream.forEach(function(RouteNote note) {
            future<error?> f1 = start sendRouteNotesFromLocation(caller, note.location);
            lock {
                ROUTE_NOTES.push(note);
            }
            error? waitErr = wait f1;
        });
    }
}
```

# 5. gRPC Security

## 5.1 Authentication and Authorization

There are two ways to enable authentication and authorization in gRPC.
1. Declarative approach
2. Imperative approach

### 5.1.1 Declarative Approach

This is also known as the configuration-driven approach, which is used for simple use cases, where users have to provide a set of configurations and do not need to be worried more about how authentication and authorization works. The user does not have full control over the configuration-driven approach.

> The service configurations are used to define the authentication and authorization configurations. Users can configure the configurations needed for different authentication schemes and configurations needed for authorizations of each authentication scheme. Also, the configurations can be provided at both the service and resource levels. The priority will be given from bottom to top. Then, the auth handler creation and request authentication/authorization is handled internally without user intervention. The requests that succeeded both authentication and/or authorization phases according to the configurations will be passed to the business logic layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The service configurations are used to define the authentication and authorization configurations. Users can configure the configurations needed for different authentication schemes and configurations needed for authorizations of each authentication scheme. Also, the configurations can be provided at both the service and  levels. The priority will be given from bottom to top. Then, the auth handler creation and request authentication/authorization is handled internally without user intervention. The requests that succeeded both authentication and/or authorization phases according to the configurations will be passed to the business logic layer.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-grpc/pull/583/commits/6d259158746f621c2794f86af4d6180e5f3c8378
